
Changing our habits is challenging for two reasons – 1. We try to change the wrong thing and
2. We try to change our habits in the wrong way.
• There are three levels at which change can occur
o The first layer is changing your outcomes – concerned with changing your results –
losing weight, publishing a book etc. Most goals you set are associated with this level
of change.
o The second layer is changing your process – concerned with changing habits and
systems – implementing a new routine at the gym, developing a meditation practice
etc. Most of the habits you build are associated with this level.
o The third and deepest layer is changing your identity – this is concerned with changing
your beliefs, your self-image, your judgement about yourself,. Most of the beliefs,
assumptions and biases you hold are associated with this level.
• Outcomes are about what you get. Processes are about what you do. Identity is about what
you believe.
• All levels of change are useful in their own way. The problem is the direction of the change.
• Many people begin the process of changing the habits by focusing on what they want to
achieve. This leads to outcome based habits. The alternative is to build identity based habits
– with this approach we start by focusing on who we wish to become.
• True behavior change is identity change. You might start a habit because of motivation, but
the only reason you will stick with one is that it becomes part of your identity.
• Your behaviors are usually a reflection of your identity. What you do is an indication of the
type of person you believe you are – either consciously or unconsciously.
• The more deeply a thought or action is tied to your identity, the more difficult it is to change.
The biggest barrier to positive change at any level – individual, team or organization, is identity
conflict.
• Your identity emerges out of your habits. You are not born with preset beliefs – every belief
is learned and conditioned through experience.
• The more you repeat a behavior, the more you reinforce the identity associated with that
behavior.
• Habits are a path to changing your identity. The most practical way to change who you are is
to change what you do. Your habits shape your identity and your identity shapes your habits – it is a two way street.
The formation of all habits is a feedback loop – your values, principles and identity should
drive the loop rather than your results

• A habit is a behavior that has been repeated enough times to become automatic. The process
of habit formation begins with trial and error. Whenever you encounter a new situation in
life, your brain has to make a decision – How do I respond to this?
• Whenever you face a problem repeatedly, your brain begins to automate the process of
solving it. As habits are created, the elvel of activity in the brain decreases.
• Jason Hreha, a behavioral scientist – “Habits are simply reliable solutions to recurring
problems in the environment”
• Habits are mental shortcuts learned from experience. It is a memory of steps that you
previously followed to solve a problem in the past.
• Habits reduce cognitive load and free up mental capacity so you an allocate your attention to
other tasks. Building habits in the present allows you to do more of what you want in the
future.
• The process of building a habit can be divided into four simple steps – cue, craving response
and reward. This four-step pattern is the backbone of every habit and your rbain runs through
these steps in the same order each time.
o Cue – the cue triggers your brain to initiate a behavior It is a bit of information that
predicts a reward. Your mind is continuously analyzing your internal and external
environment for hits of where rewards are located.
o Craving – is the motivational force behind every habit. With some some level of
motivation or desire, without craving for change, we have no reason to act. What you
crave is not the habit itself, but the change in state it delivers. E.g. you do not crave
smoking a cigarette, you crave for the feeling of relief it provides.
o Response – is the actual habit you perform, which can take the form of thought or
action. The response may depend on your motivation levels and the friction
associated with the behavior. Response also depends on your ability – a habit can
occur only if you are capable of doing it.
o Reward - Response delivers a reward – the end goal of every habit. The craving is
about wanting the reward, response is about obtaining the reward. We chase rewards
because they serve two purposes – 1. They satisfy us (rewards deliver contentmentand relief from craving) 2. They teach us (which actions are worth remembering in the
future. Your brain is a reward detector)
If the behavior is insufficient in any of the four stages, it will not become a habit. Eliminate
the cue, your habit will never start. Reduce the craving, and you won’t experience enough
motivation to act. Make the behavior difficult and you won’t be able to do it. And if the
reward fails to satisfy your desire – then you will have no reason to do it again in the future.
• The cue triggers a craving, which motivates a response which provides a reward which satisfies
a craving and ultimately becomes associated with a cue. Together these four steps form a
neurological feedback loop also known as the Habit loop.
• The Four Laws of Behavior change provides a simple set of rules for creating good habits and
breaking bad ones. When the levers are in right positions, creating good habits is easy. When
it is in the wrong positions, it is nearly impossible.
• How to create a good habit
o 1
st Law - (Cue) – Make it obvious
o 2
nd Law – (Craving) – Make it attractive
o 3
rd Law (Response) – Make it easy
o 4
th Law (Reward) – Make it satisfying
• We can invert these laws to learn how to break a bad habit
o Inversion of 1st Law (Cue) – Make it invisible
o Inversion of 2nd Law (Craving) – Make it unattractive
o Inversion of 3rd Law (Response) – Make it difficult
o Inversion of 4th Law (Reward) – Make it unsatisfying
• Whenever you want to change your behavior, you can simply ask yourself
o How can I make it obvious?
o How can I make it attractive?
o How can I make it easy?
o How can I make it satisfying?

The human brain is a prediction machine. It is continuously taking in your surroundings and
analyzing the information it comes across.
• With enough practice, you can pick up on the cues that predict certain outcomes without
consciously thinking about it. E.g. museum curators on fake art pieces, doctors / paramedics
on having one look at the patient
• Carl Jung – “Until you make the unconscious conscious, it will direct your life and you will call
it fate.”
• Japanese railway operators go through a ritual of pointing at different objects and calling out
commands – “Signal is green”, “All clear” etc. Every detail is identified, pointed at and named
aloud.
• This process is known as Pointing and Calling – a safety system designed to reduce mistakes.
May sound silly, but it reduces errors by up to 85% and cuts accidents by 30%. This is effective
because it raises the level of awareness from a nonconscious habit to a more conscious level.
• Habits scorecard is a simple exercise for one to become more aware of his behavior. For
example, have a list of items to do – and write a “+” - if it is a good habit, “-“ – if it is abad
habit and “=” if it is a neutral habit.
• There are no good or bad habits – there are only effective habits. All habits server you in some
way.
• Ask yourself – “Does this behavior help me to become the type of person I wish to be?”
• The first step to changing bad habits is to be on the lookout for them. The process of behavior
change starts with awareness. 